<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-3-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>London. QUEEN KATHARINE's apartments.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter QUEEN KATHARINE and her Women, as at work.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN KATHARINE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Take thy lute, wench: my soul grows sad with troubles;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sing, and disperse 'em, if thou canst: leave working.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>
										<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">SONG.</i>
									</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Orpheus with his lute made trees,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the mountain tops that freeze,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bow themselves when he did sing:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To his music plants and flowers</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ever sprung; as sun and showers</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There had made a lasting spring.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Every thing that heard him play,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even the billows of the sea,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hung their heads, and then lay by.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In sweet music is such art,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Killing care and grief of heart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fall asleep, or hearing, die.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter a Gentleman.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN KATHARINE</td>
							<td>How now!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gentleman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>An't please your grace, the two great cardinals</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wait in the presence.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN KATHARINE</td>
							<td>Would they speak with me?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gentleman</td>
							<td>They will'd me say so, madam.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN KATHARINE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Pray their graces</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To come near. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit Gentleman.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>What can be their business</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With me, a poor weak woman, fall'n from favour?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I do not like their coming. Now I think on't,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They should be good men; their affairs as righteous:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But all hoods make not monks.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter CARDINAL WOLSEY and CARDINAL CAMPEIUS.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td>Peace to your highness!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN KATHARINE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Your graces find me here part of a housewife,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would be all, against the worst may happen.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What are your pleasures with me, reverend lords?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>May it please you noble madam, to withdraw</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Into your private chamber, we shall give you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The full cause of our coming.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN KATHARINE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Speak it here:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There's nothing I have done yet, o' my conscience,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Deserves a corner: would all other women</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Could speak this with as free a soul as I do!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My lords, I care not, so much I am happy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Above a number, if my actions</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were tried by every tongue, every eye saw 'em,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Envy and base opinion set against 'em,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I know my life so even. If your business</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Seek me out, and that way I am wife in,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Out with it boldly: truth loves open dealing.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Tanta est erga te mentis integritas, regina</span>
									<br/>
									<span>serenissima,--</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN KATHARINE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, good my lord, no Latin;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am not such a truant since my coming,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As not to know the language I have lived in:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A strange tongue makes my cause more strange,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>suspicious;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pray, speak in English: here are some will thank you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If you speak truth, for their poor mistress' sake;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Believe me, she has had much wrong: lord cardinal,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The willing'st sin I ever yet committed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May be absolved in English.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Noble lady,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am sorry my integrity should breed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And service to his majesty and you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So deep suspicion, where all faith was meant.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We come not by the way of accusation,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To taint that honour every good tongue blesses,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor to betray you any way to sorrow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You have too much, good lady; but to know</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How you stand minded in the weighty difference</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Between the king and you; and to deliver,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like free and honest men, our just opinions</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And comforts to your cause.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL CAMPEIUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Most honour'd madam,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My Lord of York, out of his noble nature,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Zeal and obedience he still bore your grace,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Forgetting, like a good man your late censure</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Both of his truth and him, which was too far,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Offers, as I do, in a sign of peace,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His service and his counsel.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN KATHARINE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> To betray me.--</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My lords, I thank you both for your good wills;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ye speak like honest men; pray God, ye prove so!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But how to make ye suddenly an answer,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In such a point of weight, so near mine honour,--</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More near my life, I fear,--with my weak wit,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And to such men of gravity and learning,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In truth, I know not. I was set at work</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Among my maids: full little, God knows, looking</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Either for such men or such business.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For her sake that I have been,--for I feel</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The last fit of my greatness,--good your graces,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let me have time and counsel for my cause:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Alas, I am a woman, friendless, hopeless!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Madam, you wrong the king's love with these fears:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your hopes and friends are infinite.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN KATHARINE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>In England</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But little for my profit: can you think, lords,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That any Englishman dare give me counsel?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or be a known friend, 'gainst his highness' pleasure,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though he be grown so desperate to be honest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And live a subject? Nay, forsooth, my friends,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They that must weigh out my afflictions,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They that my trust must grow to, live not here:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They are, as all my other comforts, far hence</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In mine own country, lords.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL CAMPEIUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I would your grace</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would leave your griefs, and take my counsel.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN KATHARINE</td>
							<td>How, sir?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL CAMPEIUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Put your main cause into the king's protection;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He's loving and most gracious: 'twill be much</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Both for your honour better and your cause;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For if the trial of the law o'ertake ye,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You'll part away disgraced.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td>He tells you rightly.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN KATHARINE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ye tell me what ye wish for both,--my ruin:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is this your Christian counsel? out upon ye!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Heaven is above all yet; there sits a judge</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That no king can corrupt.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL CAMPEIUS</td>
							<td>Your rage mistakes us.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN KATHARINE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The more shame for ye: holy men I thought ye,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon my soul, two reverend cardinal virtues;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But cardinal sins and hollow hearts I fear ye:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mend 'em, for shame, my lords. Is this your comfort?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The cordial that ye bring a wretched lady,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A woman lost among ye, laugh'd at, scorn'd?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will not wish ye half my miseries;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have more charity: but say, I warn'd ye;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take heed, for heaven's sake, take heed, lest at once</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The burthen of my sorrows fall upon ye.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Madam, this is a mere distraction;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You turn the good we offer into envy.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN KATHARINE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ye turn me into nothing: woe upon ye</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all such false professors! would you have me--</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If you have any justice, any pity;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If ye be any thing but churchmen's habits--</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Put my sick cause into his hands that hates me?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Alas, has banish'd me his bed already,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His love, too long ago! I am old, my lords,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all the fellowship I hold now with him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is only my obedience. What can happen</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To me above this wretchedness? all your studies</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Make me a curse like this.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL CAMPEIUS</td>
							<td>Your fears are worse.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN KATHARINE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Have I lived thus long--let me speak myself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since virtue finds no friends--a wife, a true one?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A woman, I dare say without vain-glory,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Never yet branded with suspicion?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have I with all my full affections</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Still met the king? loved him next heaven? obey'd him?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Been, out of fondness, superstitious to him?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Almost forgot my prayers to content him?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And am I thus rewarded? 'tis not well, lords.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bring me a constant woman to her husband,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One that ne'er dream'd a joy beyond his pleasure;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And to that woman, when she has done most,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet will I add an honour, a great patience.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td>Madam, you wander from the good we aim at.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN KATHARINE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord, I dare not make myself so guilty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To give up willingly that noble title</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your master wed me to: nothing but death</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall e'er divorce my dignities.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td>Pray, hear me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN KATHARINE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Would I had never trod this English earth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or felt the flatteries that grow upon it!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ye have angels' faces, but heaven knows your hearts.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What will become of me now, wretched lady!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am the most unhappy woman living.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Alas, poor wenches, where are now your fortunes!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shipwreck'd upon a kingdom, where no pity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No friend, no hope; no kindred weep for me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Almost no grave allow'd me: like the lily,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That once was mistress of the field and flourish'd,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I'll hang my head and perish.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If your grace</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Could but be brought to know our ends are honest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You'ld feel more comfort: why should we, good lady,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon what cause, wrong you? alas, our places,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The way of our profession is against it:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We are to cure such sorrows, not to sow 'em.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For goodness' sake, consider what you do;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How you may hurt yourself, ay, utterly</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Grow from the king's acquaintance, by this carriage.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The hearts of princes kiss obedience,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So much they love it; but to stubborn spirits</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They swell, and grow as terrible as storms.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I know you have a gentle, noble temper,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A soul as even as a calm: pray, think us</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Those we profess, peace-makers, friends, and servants.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL CAMPEIUS</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Madam, you'll find it so. You wrong your virtues</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With these weak women's fears: a noble spirit,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As yours was put into you, ever casts</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Such doubts, as false coin, from it. The king loves you;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beware you lose it not: for us, if you please</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To trust us in your business, we are ready</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To use our utmost studies in your service.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN KATHARINE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Do what ye will, my lords: and, pray, forgive me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If I have used myself unmannerly;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You know I am a woman, lacking wit</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To make a seemly answer to such persons.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pray, do my service to his majesty:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He has my heart yet; and shall have my prayers</span>
									<br/>
									<span>While I shall have my life. Come, reverend fathers,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bestow your counsels on me: she now begs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That little thought, when she set footing here,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She should have bought her dignities so dear. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-3-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Ante-chamber to KING HENRY VIII's apartment.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter NORFOLK, SUFFOLK, SURREY, and Chamberlain.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">NORFOLK</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If you will now unite in your complaints,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And force them with a constancy, the cardinal</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cannot stand under them: if you omit</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The offer of this time, I cannot promise</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But that you shall sustain moe new disgraces,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With these you bear already.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SURREY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I am joyful</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To meet the least occasion that may give me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Remembrance of my father-in-law, the duke,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be revenged on him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SUFFOLK</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Which of the peers</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have uncontemn'd gone by him, or at least</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Strangely neglected? when did he regard</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The stamp of nobleness in any person</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Out of himself?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chamberlain</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lords, you speak your pleasures:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What he deserves of you and me I know;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What we can do to him, though now the time</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Gives way to us, I much fear. If you cannot</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bar his access to the king, never attempt</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Any thing on him; for he hath a witchcraft</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Over the king in's tongue.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">NORFOLK</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, fear him not;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His spell in that is out: the king hath found</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Matter against him that for ever mars</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The honey of his language. No, he's settled,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not to come off, in his displeasure.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SURREY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sir,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I should be glad to hear such news as this</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Once every hour.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">NORFOLK</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Believe it, this is true:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In the divorce his contrary proceedings</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are all unfolded wherein he appears</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As I would wish mine enemy.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SURREY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How came</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His practises to light?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SUFFOLK</td>
							<td>Most strangely.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SURREY</td>
							<td>O, how, how?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SUFFOLK</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The cardinal's letters to the pope miscarried,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And came to the eye o' the king: wherein was read,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How that the cardinal did entreat his holiness</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To stay the judgment o' the divorce; for if</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It did take place, 'I do,' quoth he, 'perceive</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My king is tangled in affection to</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A creature of the queen's, Lady Anne Bullen.'</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SURREY</td>
							<td>Has the king this?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SUFFOLK</td>
							<td>Believe it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SURREY</td>
							<td>Will this work?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chamberlain</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The king in this perceives him, how he coasts</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And hedges his own way. But in this point</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All his tricks founder, and he brings his physic</span>
									<br/>
									<span>After his patient's death: the king already</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath married the fair lady.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SURREY</td>
							<td>Would he had!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SUFFOLK</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>May you be happy in your wish, my lord</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For, I profess, you have it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SURREY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now, all my joy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Trace the conjunction!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SUFFOLK</td>
							<td>My amen to't!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">NORFOLK</td>
							<td>All men's!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SUFFOLK</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>There's order given for her coronation:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Marry, this is yet but young, and may be left</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To some ears unrecounted. But, my lords,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She is a gallant creature, and complete</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In mind and feature: I persuade me, from her</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will fall some blessing to this land, which shall</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In it be memorised.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SURREY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But, will the king</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Digest this letter of the cardinal's?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The Lord forbid!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">NORFOLK</td>
							<td>Marry, amen!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SUFFOLK</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, no;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There be moe wasps that buzz about his nose</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will make this sting the sooner. Cardinal Campeius</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is stol'n away to Rome; hath ta'en no leave;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Has left the cause o' the king unhandled; and</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is posted, as the agent of our cardinal,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To second all his plot. I do assure you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The king cried Ha! at this.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chamberlain</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now, God incense him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And let him cry Ha! louder!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">NORFOLK</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But, my lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When returns Cranmer?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SUFFOLK</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He is return'd in his opinions; which</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have satisfied the king for his divorce,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Together with all famous colleges</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Almost in Christendom: shortly, I believe,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His second marriage shall be publish'd, and</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her coronation. Katharine no more</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall be call'd queen, but princess dowager</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And widow to Prince Arthur.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">NORFOLK</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>This same Cranmer's</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A worthy fellow, and hath ta'en much pain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In the king's business.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SUFFOLK</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He has; and we shall see him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For it an archbishop.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">NORFOLK</td>
							<td>So I hear.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SUFFOLK</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>'Tis so.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The cardinal!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter CARDINAL WOLSEY and CROMWELL.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">NORFOLK</td>
							<td>Observe, observe, he's moody.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The packet, Cromwell.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Gave't you the king?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CROMWELL</td>
							<td>To his own hand, in's bedchamber.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td>Look'd he o' the inside of the paper?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CROMWELL</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Presently</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He did unseal them: and the first he view'd,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He did it with a serious mind; a heed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was in his countenance. You he bade</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Attend him here this morning.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Is he ready</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To come abroad?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CROMWELL</td>
							<td>I think, by this he is.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Leave me awhile. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit CROMWELL.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> It shall be to the Duchess of Alencon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The French king's sister: he shall marry her.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Anne Bullen! No; I'll no Anne Bullens for him:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There's more in't than fair visage. Bullen!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No, we'll no Bullens. Speedily I wish</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To hear from Rome. The Marchioness of Pembroke!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">NORFOLK</td>
							<td>He's discontented.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SUFFOLK</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>May be, he hears the king</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Does whet his anger to him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SURREY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sharp enough,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lord, for thy justice!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> The late queen's gentlewoman,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>a knight's daughter,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be her mistress' mistress! the queen's queen!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This candle burns not clear: 'tis I must snuff it;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then out it goes. What though I know her virtuous</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And well deserving? yet I know her for</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A spleeny Lutheran; and not wholesome to</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our cause, that she should lie i' the bosom of</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our hard-ruled king. Again, there is sprung up</span>
									<br/>
									<span>An heretic, an arch one, Cranmer; one</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath crawl'd into the favour of the king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And is his oracle.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">NORFOLK</td>
							<td>He is vex'd at something.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SURREY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I would 'twere something that would fret the string,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The master-cord on's heart!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter KING HENRY VIII, reading of a schedule, and LOVELL.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SUFFOLK</td>
							<td>The king, the king!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING HENRY VIII</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What piles of wealth hath he accumulated</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To his own portion! and what expense by the hour</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Seems to flow from him! How, i' the name of thrift,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Does he rake this together! Now, my lords,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Saw you the cardinal?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">NORFOLK</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord, we have</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stood here observing him: some strange commotion</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is in his brain: he bites his lip, and starts;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stops on a sudden, looks upon the ground,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then lays his finger on his temple, straight</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Springs out into fast gait; then stops again,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Strikes his breast hard, and anon he casts</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His eye against the moon: in most strange postures</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We have seen him set himself.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING HENRY VIII</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It may well be;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There is a mutiny in's mind. This morning</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Papers of state he sent me to peruse,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As I required: and wot you what I found</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There,--on my conscience, put unwittingly?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Forsooth, an inventory, thus importing;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The several parcels of his plate, his treasure,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rich stuffs, and ornaments of household; which</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I find at such proud rate, that it out-speaks</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Possession of a subject.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">NORFOLK</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It's heaven's will:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some spirit put this paper in the packet,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To bless your eye withal.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING HENRY VIII</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If we did think</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His contemplation were above the earth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And fix'd on spiritual object, he should still</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dwell in his musings: but I am afraid</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His thinkings are below the moon, not worth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His serious considering. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">King HENRY VIII takes his seat; whispers LOVELL, who goes to CARDINAL WOLSEY.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Heaven forgive me!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ever God bless your highness!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING HENRY VIII</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Good my lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You are full of heavenly stuff, and bear the inventory</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of your best graces in your mind; the which</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You were now running o'er: you have scarce time</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To steal from spiritual leisure a brief span</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To keep your earthly audit: sure, in that</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I deem you an ill husband, and am glad</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To have you therein my companion.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sir,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For holy offices I have a time; a time</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To think upon the part of business which</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I bear i' the state; and nature does require</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her times of preservation, which perforce</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I, her frail son, amongst my brethren mortal,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Must give my tendence to.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING HENRY VIII</td>
							<td>You have said well.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And ever may your highness yoke together,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As I will lend you cause, my doing well</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With my well saying!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING HENRY VIII</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>'Tis well said again;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And 'tis a kind of good deed to say well:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yet words are no deeds. My father loved you:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His said he did; and with his deed did crown</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His word upon you. Since I had my office,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have kept you next my heart; have not alone</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Employ'd you where high profits might come home,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But pared my present havings, to bestow</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My bounties upon you.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> What should this mean?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SURREY</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> The Lord increase this business!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING HENRY VIII</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Have I not made you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The prime man of the state? I pray you, tell me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If what I now pronounce you have found true:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, if you may confess it, say withal,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If you are bound to us or no. What say you?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My sovereign, I confess your royal graces,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shower'd on me daily, have been more than could</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My studied purposes requite; which went</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beyond all man's endeavours: my endeavours</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have ever come too short of my desires,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet filed with my abilities: mine own ends</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have been mine so that evermore they pointed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To the good of your most sacred person and</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The profit of the state. For your great graces</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Heap'd upon me, poor undeserver, I</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can nothing render but allegiant thanks,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My prayers to heaven for you, my loyalty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which ever has and ever shall be growing,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till death, that winter, kill it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING HENRY VIII</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Fairly answer'd;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A loyal and obedient subject is</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therein illustrated: the honour of it</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Does pay the act of it; as, i' the contrary,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The foulness is the punishment. I presume</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, as my hand has open'd bounty to you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My heart dropp'd love, my power rain'd honour, more</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On you than any; so your hand and heart,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your brain, and every function of your power,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Should, notwithstanding that your bond of duty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As 'twere in love's particular, be more</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To me, your friend, than any.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I do profess</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That for your highness' good I ever labour'd</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More than mine own; that am, have, and will be--</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though all the world should crack their duty to you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And throw it from their soul; though perils did</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Abound, as thick as thought could make 'em, and</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Appear in forms more horrid,--yet my duty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As doth a rock against the chiding flood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Should the approach of this wild river break,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And stand unshaken yours.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING HENRY VIII</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>'Tis nobly spoken:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take notice, lords, he has a loyal breast,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For you have seen him open't. Read o'er this; <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Giving him papers.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>And after, this: and then to breakfast with</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What appetite you have. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit KING HENRY VIII, frowning upon CARDINAL WOLSEY: the Nobles throng after him, smiling and whispering.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What should this mean?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What sudden anger's this? how have I reap'd it?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He parted frowning from me, as if ruin</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Leap'd from his eyes: so looks the chafed lion</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon the daring huntsman that has gall'd him;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then makes him nothing. I must read this paper;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I fear, the story of his anger. 'Tis so;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This paper has undone me: 'tis the account</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of all that world of wealth I have drawn together</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For mine own ends; indeed, to gain the popedom,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And fee my friends in Rome. O negligence!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fit for a fool to fall by: what cross devil</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Made me put this main secret in the packet</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I sent the king? Is there no way to cure this?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No new device to beat this from his brains?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I know 'twill stir him strongly; yet I know</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A way, if it take right, in spite of fortune</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will bring me off again. What's this? 'To the Pope!'</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The letter, as I live, with all the business</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I writ to's holiness. Nay then, farewell!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have touch'd the highest point of all my greatness;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, from that full meridian of my glory,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I haste now to my setting: I shall fall</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like a bright exhalation m the evening,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And no man see me more.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter to CARDINAL WOLSEY, NORFOLK and SUFFOLK, SURREY, and the Chamberlain.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">NORFOLK</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Hear the king's pleasure, cardinal: who commands you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To render up the great seal presently</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Into our hands; and to confine yourself</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To Asher House, my Lord of Winchester's,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till you hear further from his highness.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Stay:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where's your commission, lords? words cannot carry</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Authority so weighty.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SUFFOLK</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Who dare cross 'em,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bearing the king's will from his mouth expressly?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Till I find more than will or words to do it,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I mean your malice, know, officious lords,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I dare and must deny it. Now I feel</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of what coarse metal ye are moulded, envy:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How eagerly ye follow my disgraces,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As if it fed ye! and how sleek and wanton</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ye appear in every thing may bring my ruin!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Follow your envious courses, men of malice;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You have Christian warrant for 'em, and, no doubt,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In time will find their fit rewards. That seal,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You ask with such a violence, the king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mine and your master, with his own hand gave me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bade me enjoy it, with the place and honours,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>During my life; and, to confirm his goodness,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tied it by letters-patents: now, who'll take it?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SURREY</td>
							<td>The king, that gave it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td>It must be himself, then.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SURREY</td>
							<td>Thou art a proud traitor, priest.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Proud lord, thou liest:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Within these forty hours Surrey durst better</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have burnt that tongue than said so.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SURREY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thy ambition,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou scarlet sin, robb'd this bewailing land</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of noble Buckingham, my father-in-law:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The heads of all thy brother cardinals,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With thee and all thy best parts bound together,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Weigh'd not a hair of his. Plague of your policy!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You sent me deputy for Ireland;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Far from his succor, from the king, from all</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That might have mercy on the fault thou gavest him;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whilst your great goodness, out of holy pity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Absolved him with an axe.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>This, and all else</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This talking lord can lay upon my credit,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I answer is most false. The duke by law</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Found his deserts: how innocent I was</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From any private malice in his end,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His noble jury and foul cause can witness.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If I loved many words, lord, I should tell you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You have as little honesty as honour,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That in the way of loyalty and truth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Toward the king, my ever royal master,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dare mate a sounder man than Surrey can be,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all that love his follies.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SURREY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>By my soul,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your long coat, priest, protects you; thou</span>
									<br/>
									<span>shouldst feel</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My sword i' the life-blood of thee else. My lords,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can ye endure to hear this arrogance?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And from this fellow? if we live thus tamely,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be thus jaded by a piece of scarlet,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Farewell nobility; let his grace go forward,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And dare us with his cap like larks.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>All goodness</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is poison to thy stomach.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SURREY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yes, that goodness</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of gleaning all the land's wealth into one,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Into your own hands, cardinal, by extortion;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The goodness of your intercepted packets</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You writ to the pope against the king: your goodness,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since you provoke me, shall be most notorious.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My Lord of Norfolk, as you are truly noble,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As you respect the common good, the state</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of our despised nobility, our issues,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who, if he live, will scarce be gentlemen,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Produce the grand sum of his sins, the articles</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Collected from his life. I'll startle you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Worse than the scaring bell, when the brown wench</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lay kissing in your arms, lord cardinal.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How much, methinks, I could despise this man,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But that I am bound in charity against it!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">NORFOLK</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Those articles, my lord, are in the king's hand:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, thus much, they are foul ones.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>So much fairer</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And spotless shall mine innocence arise,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When the king knows my truth.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SURREY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>This cannot save you:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I thank my memory, I yet remember</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some of these articles; and out they shall.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now, if you can blush and cry 'guilty,' cardinal,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You'll show a little honesty.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Speak on, sir;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I dare your worst objections: if I blush,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It is to see a nobleman want manners.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SURREY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I had rather want those than my head. Have at you!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>First, that, without the king's assent or knowledge,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You wrought to be a legate; by which power</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You maim'd the jurisdiction of all bishops.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">NORFOLK</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then, that in all you writ to Rome, or else</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To foreign princes, 'Ego et Rex meus'</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was still inscribed; in which you brought the king</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be your servant.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SUFFOLK</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then that, without the knowledge</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Either of king or council, when you went</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ambassador to the emperor, you made bold</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To carry into Flanders the great seal.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SURREY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Item, you sent a large commission</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To Gregory de Cassado, to conclude,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Without the king's will or the state's allowance,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A league between his highness and Ferrara.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SUFFOLK</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That, out of mere ambition, you have caused</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your holy hat to be stamp'd on the king's coin.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SURREY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then that you have sent innumerable substance--</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By what means got, I leave to your own conscience--</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To furnish Rome, and to prepare the ways</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You have for dignities; to the mere undoing</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of all the kingdom. Many more there are;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which, since they are of you, and odious,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will not taint my mouth with.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chamberlain</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O my lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Press not a falling man too far! 'tis virtue:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His faults lie open to the laws; let them,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not you, correct him. My heart weeps to see him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So little of his great self.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SURREY</td>
							<td>I forgive him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">SUFFOLK</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Lord cardinal, the king's further pleasure is,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Because all those things you have done of late,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By your power legatine, within this kingdom,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fall into the compass of a praemunire,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That therefore such a writ be sued against you;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To forfeit all your goods, lands, tenements,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Chattels, and whatsoever, and to be</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Out of the king's protection. This is my charge.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">NORFOLK</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And so we'll leave you to your meditations</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How to live better. For your stubborn answer</span>
									<br/>
									<span>About the giving back the great seal to us,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The king shall know it, and, no doubt, shall thank you.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So fare you well, my little good lord cardinal. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt all but CARDINAL WOLSEY.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>So farewell to the little good you bear me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Farewell! a long farewell, to all my greatness!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This is the state of man: to-day he puts forth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The tender leaves of hopes; to-morrow blossoms,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And bears his blushing honours thick upon him;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The third day comes a frost, a killing frost,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, when he thinks, good easy man, full surely</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His greatness is a-ripening, nips his root,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then he falls, as I do. I have ventured,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like little wanton boys that swim on bladders,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This many summers in a sea of glory,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But far beyond my depth: my high-blown pride</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At length broke under me and now has left me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Weary and old with service, to the mercy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of a rude stream, that must for ever hide me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Vain pomp and glory of this world, I hate ye:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I feel my heart new open'd. O, how wretched</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is that poor man that hangs on princes' favours!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There is, betwixt that smile we would aspire to,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That sweet aspect of princes, and their ruin,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More pangs and fears than wars or women have:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And when he falls, he falls like Lucifer,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Never to hope again.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter CROMWELL, and stands amazed.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>Why, how now, Cromwell!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CROMWELL</td>
							<td>I have no power to speak, sir.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What, amazed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At my misfortunes? can thy spirit wonder</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A great man should decline? Nay, an you weep,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am fall'n indeed.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CROMWELL</td>
							<td>How does your grace?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, well;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Never so truly happy, my good Cromwell.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I know myself now; and I feel within me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A peace above all earthly dignities,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A still and quiet conscience. The king has cured me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I humbly thank his grace; and from these shoulders,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These ruin'd pillars, out of pity, taken</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A load would sink a navy, too much honour:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, 'tis a burthen, Cromwell, 'tis a burthen</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Too heavy for a man that hopes for heaven!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CROMWELL</td>
							<td>I am glad your grace has made that right use of it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I hope I have: I am able now, methinks,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Out of a fortitude of soul I feel,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To endure more miseries and greater far</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than my weak-hearted enemies dare offer.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What news abroad?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CROMWELL</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The heaviest and the worst</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is your displeasure with the king.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td>God bless him!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CROMWELL</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The next is, that Sir Thomas More is chosen</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lord chancellor in your place.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That's somewhat sudden:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But he's a learned man. May he continue</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Long in his highness' favour, and do justice</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For truth's sake and his conscience; that his bones,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When he has run his course and sleeps in blessings,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May have a tomb of orphans' tears wept on em! What more?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CROMWELL</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That Cranmer is return'd with welcome,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Install'd lord archbishop of Canterbury.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td>That's news indeed.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CROMWELL</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Last, that the Lady Anne,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whom the king hath in secrecy long married,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This day was view'd in open as his queen,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Going to chapel; and the voice is now</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Only about her coronation.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>There was the weight that pull'd me down. O Cromwell,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The king has gone beyond me: all my glories</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In that one woman I have lost for ever:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No sun shall ever usher forth mine honours,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or gild again the noble troops that waited</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon my smiles. Go, get thee from me, Cromwell;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am a poor fall'n man, unworthy now</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be thy lord and master: seek the king;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That sun, I pray, may never set! I have told him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What and how true thou art: he will advance thee;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some little memory of me will stir him--</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I know his noble nature--not to let</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy hopeful service perish too: good Cromwell,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Neglect him not; make use now, and provide</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For thine own future safety.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CROMWELL</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O my lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Must I, then, leave you? must I needs forego</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So good, so noble and so true a master?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bear witness, all that have not hearts of iron,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With what a sorrow Cromwell leaves his lord.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The king shall have my service: but my prayers</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For ever and for ever shall be yours.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Cromwell, I did not think to shed a tear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In all my miseries; but thou hast forced me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Out of thy honest truth, to play the woman.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let's dry our eyes: and thus far hear me, Cromwell;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, when I am forgotten, as I shall be,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And sleep in dull cold marble, where no mention</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of me more must be heard of, say, I taught thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Say, Wolsey, that once trod the ways of glory,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And sounded all the depths and shoals of honour,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Found thee a way, out of his wreck, to rise in;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A sure and safe one, though thy master miss'd it.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mark but my fall, and that that ruin'd me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cromwell, I charge thee, fling away ambition:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By that sin fell the angels; how can man, then,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The image of his Maker, hope to win by it?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Love thyself last: cherish those hearts that hate thee;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Corruption wins not more than honesty.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Still in thy right hand carry gentle peace,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To silence envious tongues. Be just, and fear not:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let all the ends thou aim'st at be thy country's,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy God's, and truth's; then if thou fall'st,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O Cromwell,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou fall'st a blessed martyr! Serve the king;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And,--prithee, lead me in:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There take an inventory of all I have,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To the last penny; 'tis the king's: my robe,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And my integrity to heaven, is all</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I dare now call mine own. O Cromwell, Cromwell!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had I but served my God with half the zeal</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I served my king, he would not in mine age</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have left me naked to mine enemies.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CROMWELL</td>
							<td>Good sir, have patience.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CARDINAL WOLSEY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>So I have. Farewell</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The hopes of court! my hopes in heaven do dwell. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
