<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-2-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Westminster. A street.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter two <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gentlemen</b>, meeting.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Gentleman</td>
							<td>Whither away so fast?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Gentleman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, God save ye!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even to the hall, to hear what shall become</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of the great Duke of Buckingham.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Gentleman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I’ll save you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That labour, sir. All’s now done, but the ceremony</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of bringing back the prisoner.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Gentleman</td>
							<td>Were you there?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Gentleman</td>
							<td>Yes, indeed, was I.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Gentleman</td>
							<td>Pray, speak what has happen’d.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Gentleman</td>
							<td>You may guess quickly what.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Gentleman</td>
							<td>Is he found guilty?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Gentleman</td>
							<td>Yes, truly is he, and condemn’d upon’t.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Gentleman</td>
							<td>I am sorry for’t.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Gentleman</td>
							<td>So are a number more.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Gentleman</td>
							<td>But, pray, how pass’d it?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Gentleman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I’ll tell you in a little. The great duke</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Came to the bar; where to his accusations</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He pleaded still not guilty and alleged</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Many sharp reasons to defeat the law.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The king’s attorney on the contrary</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Urged on the examinations, proofs, confessions</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of divers witnesses; which the duke desired</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To have brought <i xml:lang="la">vivâ voce</i> to his face:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At which appear’d against him his surveyor;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sir Gilbert Peck his chancellor; and John Car,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Confessor to him; with that devil-monk,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hopkins, that made this mischief.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Gentleman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That was he</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That fed him with his prophecies?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Gentleman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The same.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All these accused him strongly; which he fain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would have flung from him, but, indeed, he could not:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And so his peers, upon this evidence,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have found him guilty of high treason. Much</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He spoke, and learnedly, for life; but all</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was either pitied in him or forgotten.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Gentleman</td>
							<td>After all this, how did he bear himself?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Gentleman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>When he was brought again to the bar, to hear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His knell rung out, his judgment, he was stirr’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With such an agony, he sweat extremely,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And something spoke in choler, ill, and hasty:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But he fell to himself again, and sweetly</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In all the rest show’d a most noble patience.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Gentleman</td>
							<td>I do not think he fears death.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Gentleman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sure, he does not:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He never was so womanish; the cause</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He may a little grieve at.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Gentleman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Certainly</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The cardinal is the end of this.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Gentleman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Tis likely,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By all conjectures: first, Kildare’s attainder,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then deputy of Ireland; who removed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Earl Surrey was sent thither, and in haste too,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lest he should help his father.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Gentleman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That trick of state</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was a deep envious one.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Gentleman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>At his return</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No doubt he will requite it. This is noted,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And generally, whoever the king favours,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The cardinal instantly will find employment,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And far enough from court too.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Gentleman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>All the commons</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hate him perniciously, and, o’ my conscience,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wish him ten fathom deep: this duke as much</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They love and dote on; call him bounteous Buckingham,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The mirror of all courtesy;⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Gentleman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Stay there, sir,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And see the noble ruin’d man you speak of.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Buckingham</b> from his arraignment; tip-staves before him; the axe with the edge towards him; halberds on each side: accompanied with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Thomas Lovell</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Nicholas Vaux</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir William Sands</b>, and common people.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Gentleman</td>
							<td>Let’s stand close, and behold him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Buckingham</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>All good people,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You that thus far have come to pity me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hear what I say, and then go home and lose me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have this day received a traitor’s judgment,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And by that name must die: yet, heaven bear witness,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And if I have a conscience, let it sink me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even as the axe falls, if I be not faithful!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The law I bear no malice for my death;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’T has done, upon the premises, but justice:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But those that sought it I could wish more Christians:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be what they will, I heartily forgive ’em:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet let ’em look they glory not in mischief,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor build their evils on the graves of great men;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For then my guiltless blood must cry against ’em.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For further life in this world I ne’er hope,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor will I sue, although the king have mercies</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More than I dare make faults. You few that loved me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And dare be bold to weep for Buckingham,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His noble friends and fellows, whom to leave</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is only bitter to him, only dying,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go with me, like good angels, to my end;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, as the long divorce of steel falls on me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Make of your prayers one sweet sacrifice,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And lift my soul to heaven. Lead on, o’ God’s name.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lovell</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I do beseech your grace, for charity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If ever any malice in your heart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were hid against me, now to forgive me frankly.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Buckingham</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sir Thomas Lovell, I as free forgive you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As I would be forgiven: I forgive all;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There cannot be those numberless offences</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Gainst me, that I cannot take peace with: no black envy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall mark my grave. Commend me to his grace;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, if he speak of Buckingham, pray, tell him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You met him half in heaven: my vows and prayers</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet are the king’s; and, till my soul forsake,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall cry for blessings on him: may he live</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Longer than I have time to tell his years!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ever beloved and loving may his rule be!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And when old time shall lead him to his end,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Goodness and he fill up one monument!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lovell</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>To the water side I must conduct your grace;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then give my charge up to Sir Nicholas Vaux,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who undertakes you to your end.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vaux</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Prepare there,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The duke is coming: see the barge be ready;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And fit it with such furniture as suits</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The greatness of his person.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Buckingham</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nay, Sir Nicholas,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let it alone; my state now will but mock me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When I came hither, I was lord high constable</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And Duke of Buckingham; now, poor Edward Bohun:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet I am richer than my base accusers,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That never knew what truth meant: I now seal it;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with that blood will make ’em one day groan for’t.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My noble father, Henry of Buckingham,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who first raised head against usurping Richard,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Flying for succour to his servant Banister,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Being distress’d, was by that wretch betray’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And without trial fell; God’s peace be with him!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Henry the Seventh succeeding, truly pitying</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My father’s loss, like a most royal prince,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Restored me to my honours, and, out of ruins,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Made my name once more noble. Now his son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Henry the Eighth, life, honour, name and all</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That made me happy at one stroke has taken</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For ever from the world. I had my trial,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, must needs say, a noble one; which makes me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A little happier than my wretched father:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet thus far we are one in fortunes: both</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fell by our servants, by those men we loved most,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A most unnatural and faithless service!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Heaven has an end in all: yet, you that hear me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This from a dying man receive as certain:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where you are liberal of your loves and counsels</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be sure you be not loose; for those you make friends</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And give your hearts to, when they once perceive</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The least rub in your fortunes, fall away</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like water from ye, never found again</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But where they mean to sink ye. All good people,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pray for me! I must now forsake ye: the last hour</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of my long weary life is come upon me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Farewell:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And when you would say something that is sad,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Speak how I fell. I have done; and God forgive me! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke</b> and Train.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Gentleman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, this is full of pity! Sir, it calls,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I fear, too many curses on their heads</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That were the authors.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Gentleman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If the duke be guiltless,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis full of woe: yet I can give you inkling</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of an ensuing evil, if it fall,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Greater than this.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Gentleman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Good angels keep it from us!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What may it be? You do not doubt my faith, sir?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Gentleman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>This secret is so weighty, ’twill require</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A strong faith to conceal it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Gentleman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Let me have it;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I do not talk much.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Gentleman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I am confident;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You shall, sir: did you not of late days hear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A buzzing of a separation</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Between the king and Katharine?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Gentleman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yes, but it held not:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For when the king once heard it, out of anger</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He sent command to the lord mayor straight</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To stop the rumour, and allay those tongues</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That durst disperse it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Gentleman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But that slander, sir,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is found a truth now: for it grows again</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fresher than e’er it was; and held for certain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The king will venture at it. Either the cardinal,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or some about him near, have, out of malice</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To the good queen, possess’d him with a scruple</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That will undo her: to confirm this too,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cardinal Campeius is arrived, and lately;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As all think, for this business.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Gentleman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Tis the cardinal;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And merely to revenge him on the emperor</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For not bestowing on him, at his asking,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The archbishopric of Toledo, this is purposed.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Gentleman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I think you have hit the mark: but is’t not cruel</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That she should feel the smart of this? The cardinal</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will have his will, and she must fall.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Gentleman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Tis woeful.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We are too open here to argue this;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let’s think in private more. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-2-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p>An ante-chamber in the palace.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Chamberlain</b>, reading a letter.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chamberlain</td>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
									<p>“My lord, the horses your lordship sent for, with all the care I had, I saw well chosen, ridden, and furnished. They were young and handsome, and of the best breed in the north. When they were ready to set out for London, a man of my lord cardinal’s, by commission and main power, took ’em from me; with this reason: His master would be served before a subject, if not before the king; which stopped our mouths, sir.”</p>
								</blockquote>
								<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>I fear he will indeed: well, let him have them:</span>
										<br/>
										<span>He will have all, I think.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter, to the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Chamberlain</b>, the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Dukes of Norfolk</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Norfolk</td>
							<td>Well met, my lord chamberlain.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chamberlain</td>
							<td>Good day to both your graces.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td>How is the king employ’d?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chamberlain</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I left him private,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Full of sad thoughts and troubles.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Norfolk</td>
							<td>What’s the cause?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chamberlain</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It seems the marriage with his brother’s wife</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Has crept too near his conscience.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, his conscience</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Has crept too near another lady.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Norfolk</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Tis so:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This is the cardinal’s doing, the king-cardinal:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That blind priest, like the eldest son of fortune,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Turns what he list. The king will know him one day.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td>Pray God he do! he’ll never know himself else.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Norfolk</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How holily he works in all his business!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with what zeal! for, now he has crack’d the league</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Between us and the emperor, the queen’s great nephew,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He dives into the king’s soul, and there scatters</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dangers, doubts, wringing of the conscience,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fears, and despairs; and all these for his marriage:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And out of all these to restore the king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He counsels a divorce; a loss of her</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, like a jewel, has hung twenty years</span>
									<br/>
									<span>About his neck, yet never lost her lustre;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of her that loves him with that excellence</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That angels love good men with; even of her</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, when the greatest stroke of fortune falls,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will bless the king: and is not this course pious?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chamberlain</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Heaven keep me from such counsel! ’Tis most true</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These news are every where; every tongue speaks ’em,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And every true heart weeps for’t: all that dare</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Look into these affairs see this main end,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The French king’s sister. Heaven will one day open</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The king’s eyes, that so long have slept upon</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This bold bad man.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td>And free us from his slavery.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Norfolk</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We had need pray,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And heartily, for our deliverance;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or this imperious man will work us all</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From princes into pages: all men’s honours</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lie like one lump before him, to be fashion’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Into what pitch he please.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>For me, my lords,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I love him not, nor fear him; there’s my creed:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As I am made without him, so I’ll stand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If the king please; his curses and his blessings</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Touch me alike, they’re breath I not believe in.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I knew him, and I know him; so I leave him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To him that made him proud, the pope.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Norfolk</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Let’s in;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with some other business put the king</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From these sad thoughts, that work too much upon him:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My lord, you’ll bear us company?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chamberlain</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Excuse me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The king has sent me otherwhere: besides,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You’ll find a most unfit time to disturb him:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Health to your lordships.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Norfolk</td>
							<td>Thanks, my good lord chamberlain. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Chamberlain</b>; and the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King</b> draws the curtain, and sits reading pensively.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td>How sad he looks! sure, he is much afflicted.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King</td>
							<td>Who’s there, ha?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Norfolk</td>
							<td>Pray God he be not angry.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Who’s there, I say? How dare you thrust yourselves</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Into my private meditations?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who am I? ha?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Norfolk</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A gracious king that pardons all offences</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Malice ne’er meant: our breach of duty this way</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is business of estate; in which we come</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To know your royal pleasure.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ye are too bold:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go to; I’ll make ye know your times of business:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is this an hour for temporal affairs, ha?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Wolsey</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Campeius</b>, with a commission.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Who’s there? my good lord cardinal? O my Wolsey,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The quiet of my wounded conscience;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou art a cure fit for a king. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Campeius</b>.</i> You’re welcome,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Most learned reverend sir, into our kingdom:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Use us and it. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Wolsey</b>.</i> My good lord, have great care</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I be not found a talker.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wolsey</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sir, you cannot.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would your grace would give us but an hour</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of private conference.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Norfolk</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</b>.</i> We are busy; go.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Norfolk</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</b>.</i> This priest has no pride in him?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Norfolk</b>.</i> Not to speak of:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would not be so sick though for his place:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But this cannot continue.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Norfolk</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</b>.</i> If it do,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll venture one have-at-him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Norfolk</b>.</i> I another. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Norfolk</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</b>.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wolsey</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Your grace has given a precedent of wisdom</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Above all princes, in committing freely</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your scruple to the voice of Christendom:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who can be angry now? what envy reach you?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The Spaniard, tied blood and favour to her,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Must now confess, if they have any goodness,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The trial just and noble. All the clerks,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I mean the learned ones, in Christian kingdoms</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have their free voices: Rome, the nurse of judgment,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Invited by your noble self, hath sent</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One general tongue unto us, this good man,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This just and learned priest, Cardinal Campeius;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whom once more I present unto your highness.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And once more in mine arms I bid him welcome,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thank the holy conclave for their loves:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They have sent me such a man I would have wish’d for.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Campeius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Your grace must needs deserve all strangers’ loves,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You are so noble. To your highness’ hand</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I tender my commission; by whose virtue,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The court of Rome commanding, you, my lord</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cardinal of York, are join’d with me their servant</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In the unpartial judging of this business.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Two equal men. The queen shall be acquainted</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Forthwith for what you come. Where’s Gardiner?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wolsey</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I know your majesty has always loved her</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So dear in heart, not to deny her that</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A woman of less place might ask by law:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Scholars allow’d freely to argue for her.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay, and the best she shall have; and my favour</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To him that does best: God forbid else. Cardinal,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Prithee, call Gardiner to me, my new secretary:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I find him a fit fellow. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Wolsey</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Wolsey</b>, with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gardiner</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wolsey</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gardiner</b>.</i> Give me your hand: much joy and favour to you;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You are the king’s now.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gardiner</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Wolsey</b>.</i> But to be commanded</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For ever by your grace, whose hand has raised me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King</td>
							<td>Come hither, Gardiner. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Walks and whispers.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Campeius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My Lord of York, was not one Doctor Pace</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In this man’s place before him?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wolsey</td>
							<td>Yes, he was.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Campeius</td>
							<td>Was he not held a learned man?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wolsey</td>
							<td>Yes, surely.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Campeius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Believe me, there’s an ill opinion spread then</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even of yourself, lord cardinal.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wolsey</td>
							<td>How! of me?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Campeius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>They will not stick to say you envied him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And fearing he would rise, he was so virtuous,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Kept him a foreign man still; which so grieved him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That he ran mad and died.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wolsey</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Heaven’s peace be with him!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That’s Christian care enough: for living murmurers</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There’s places of rebuke. He was a fool;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For he would needs be virtuous: that good fellow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If I command him, follows my appointment:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will have none so near else. Learn this, brother,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We live not to be grip’d by meaner persons.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Deliver this with modesty to the queen. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gardiner</b>.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>The most convenient place that I can think of</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For such receipt of learning is Black-Friars;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There ye shall meet about this weighty business.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My Wolsey, see it furnish’d. O, my lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would it not grieve an able man to leave</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So sweet a bedfellow? But, conscience, conscience!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, ’tis a tender place; and I must leave her. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-2-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h3>
				<p>An ante-chamber of the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen’s</b> apartments.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne Bullen</b> and an <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Lady</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Not for that neither: here’s the pang that pinches:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His highness having lived so long with her, and she</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So good a lady that no tongue could ever</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pronounce dishonour of her; by my life,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She never knew harm-doing: O, now, after</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So many courses of the sun enthroned,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Still growing in a majesty and pomp, the which</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To leave a thousand-fold more bitter than</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis sweet at first to acquire⁠—after this process,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To give her the avaunt! it is a pity</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would move a monster.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Lady</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Hearts of most hard temper</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Melt and lament for her.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, God’s will! much better</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She ne’er had known pomp: though’t be temporal,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet, if that quarrel, fortune, do divorce</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It from the bearer, ’tis a sufferance panging</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As soul and body’s severing.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Lady</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Alas, poor lady!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She’s a stranger now again.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>So much the more</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Must pity drop upon her. Verily,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I swear, ’tis better to be lowly born,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And range with humble livers in content,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than to be perk’d up in a glistering grief,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And wear a golden sorrow.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Lady</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Our content</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is our best having.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>By my troth and maidenhead,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would not be a queen.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Lady</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Beshrew me, I would,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And venture maidenhead for’t; and so would you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For all this spice of your hypocrisy:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You, that have so fair parts of woman on you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have too a woman’s heart; which ever yet</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Affected eminence, wealth, sovereignty;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which, to say sooth, are blessings; and which gifts,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Saving your mincing, the capacity</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of your soft cheveril conscience would receive,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If you might please to stretch it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td>Nay, good troth.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Lady</td>
							<td>Yes, troth, and troth; you would not be a queen?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td>No, not for all the riches under heaven.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Lady</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Tis strange: a three-pence bow’d would hire me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Old as I am, to queen it: but, I pray you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What think you of a duchess? have you limbs</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To bear that load of title?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td>No, in truth.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Lady</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then you are weakly made: pluck off a little;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would not be a young count in your way,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For more than blushing comes to: if your back</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cannot vouchsafe this burthen, ’tis too weak</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ever to get a boy.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How you do talk!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I swear again, I would not be a queen</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For all the world.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Lady</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>In faith, for little England</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You’ld venture an emballing: I myself</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would for Carnarvonshire, although there long’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No more to the crown but that. Lo, who comes here?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Chamberlain</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chamberlain</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Good morrow, ladies. What were’t worth to know</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The secret of your conference?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My good lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not your demand; it values not your asking:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our mistress’ sorrows we were pitying.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chamberlain</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It was a gentle business, and becoming</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The action of good women: there is hope</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All will be well.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td>Now, I pray God, amen!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chamberlain</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You bear a gentle mind, and heavenly blessings</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Follow such creatures. That you may, fair lady,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Perceive I speak sincerely, and high note’s</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ta’en of your many virtues, the king’s majesty</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Commends his good opinion of you, and</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Does purpose honour to you no less flowing</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than Marchioness of Pembroke: to which title</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A thousand pound a year, annual support,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Out of his grace he adds.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I do not know</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What kind of my obedience I should tender;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More than my all is nothing: nor my prayers</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are not words duly hallow’d, nor my wishes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More worth than empty vanities; yet prayers and wishes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are all I can return. Beseech your lordship,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Vouchsafe to speak my thanks and my obedience,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As from a blushing handmaid, to his highness;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose health and royalty I pray for.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chamberlain</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Lady,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I shall not fail to approve the fair conceit</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The king hath of you. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> I have perused her well;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beauty and honour in her are so mingled</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That they have caught the king: and who knows yet</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But from this lady may proceed a gem</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To lighten all this isle? I’ll to the king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And say I spoke with you. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Chamberlain</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td>My honour’d lord.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Lady</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, this it is; see, see!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have been begging sixteen years in court,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Am yet a courtier beggarly, nor could</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come pat betwixt too early and too late</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For any suit of pounds; and you, O fate!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A very fresh-fish here⁠—fie, fie, fie upon</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This compell’d fortune!⁠—have your mouth fill’d up</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before you open it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td>This is strange to me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Lady</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How tastes it? is it bitter? forty pence, no.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There was a lady once, ’tis an old story,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That would not be a queen, that would she not,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For all the mud in Egypt: have you heard it?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td>Come, you are pleasant.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Lady</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>With your theme, I could</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O’ermount the lark. The Marchioness of Pembroke!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A thousand pounds a year for pure respect!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No other obligation! By my life,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That promises moe thousands: honour’s train</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is longer than his foreskirt. By this time</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I know your back will bear a duchess: say,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are you not stronger than you were?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Anne</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Good lady,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Make yourself mirth with your particular fancy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And leave me out on’t. Would I had no being,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If this salute my blood a jot: it faints me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To think what follows.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The queen is comfortless, and we forgetful</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In our long absence: pray, do not deliver</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What here you’ve heard to her.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Old Lady</td>
							<td>What do you think me? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-2-4" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
				</h3>
				<p>A hall in Black-Friars.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Trumpets, sennet, and cornets. Enter two Vergers, with short silver wands; next them, two <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Scribes</b>, in the habit of doctors; after them, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop of Canterbury</b> alone; after him, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishops of Lincoln</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ely</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Rochester</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Saint Asaph</b>; next them, with some small distance, follows a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gentleman</b> bearing the purse, with the great seal, and a cardinal’s hat; then two Priests, bearing each a silver cross; then a Gentleman-usher bare-headed, accompanied with a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sergeant-at-arms</b> bearing a silver mace; then two <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gentlemen</b> bearing two great silver pillars; after them, side by side, the two <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Cardinals</b>; two Noblemen with the sword and mace. The <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King</b> takes place under the cloth of state; the two <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Cardinals</b> sit under him as judges. The <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</b> takes place some distance from the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King</b>. The <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishops</b> place themselves on each side the court, in manner of a consistory; below them, the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Scribes</b>. The Lords sit next the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishops</b>. The rest of the Attendants stand in convenient order about the stage.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wolsey</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Whilst our commission from Rome is read,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let silence be commanded.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What’s the need?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It hath already publicly been read,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And on all sides the authority allow’d;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You may, then, spare that time.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wolsey</td>
							<td>Be’t so. Proceed.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Scribe</td>
							<td>Say, Henry King of England, come into the court.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Crier</td>
							<td>Henry King of England, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King</td>
							<td>Here.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Scribe</td>
							<td>Say, Katharine Queen of England, come into the court.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Crier</td>
							<td>Katharine Queen of England, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</b> makes no answer, rises out of her chair, goes about the court, comes to the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King</b>, and kneels at his feet; then speaks.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Katherine</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sir, I desire you do me right and justice;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And to bestow your pity on me: for</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am a most poor woman, and a stranger,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Born out of your dominions; having here</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No judge indifferent, nor no more assurance</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of equal friendship and proceeding. Alas, sir,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In what have I offended you? what cause</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath my behaviour given to your displeasure,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That thus you should proceed to put me off,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And take your good grace from me? Heaven witness,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have been to you a true and humble wife,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At all times to your will conformable;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ever in fear to kindle your dislike,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yea, subject to your countenance, glad or sorry</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As I saw it inclined: when was the hour</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I ever contradicted your desire,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or made it not mine too? Or which of your friends</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have I not strove to love, although I knew</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He were mine enemy? what friend of mine</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That had to him derived your anger, did I</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Continue in my liking? nay, gave notice</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He was from thence discharged? Sir, call to mind</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I have been your wife, in this obedience,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upward of twenty years, and have been blest</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With many children by you: if, in the course</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And process of this time, you can report,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And prove it too, against mine honour aught,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My bond to wedlock, or my love and duty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against your sacred person, in God’s name,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Turn me away; and let the foul’st contempt</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shut door upon me, and so give me up</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To the sharp’st kind of justice. Please you, sir,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The king, your father, was reputed for</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A prince most prudent, of an excellent</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And unmatch’d wit and judgment: Ferdinand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My father, king of Spain, was reckon’d one</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The wisest prince that there had reign’d by many</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A year before: it is not to be question’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That they had gather’d a wise council to them</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of every realm, that did debate this business,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who deem’d our marriage lawful: wherefore I humbly</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beseech you, sir, to spare me, till I may</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be by my friends in Spain advised; whose counsel</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will implore: if not, i’ the name of God,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your pleasure be fulfill’d!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wolsey</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You have here, lady,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And of your choice, these reverend fathers; men</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of singular integrity and learning,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yea, the elect o’ the land, who are assembled</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To plead your cause: it shall be therefore bootless</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That longer you desire the court; as well</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For your own quiet, as to rectify</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What is unsettled in the king.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Campeius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>His grace</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath spoken well and justly: therefore, madam,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It’s fit this royal session do proceed;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that, without delay, their arguments</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be now produced and heard.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Katherine</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Lord cardinal,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To you I speak.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wolsey</td>
							<td>Your pleasure, madam?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Katherine</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sir,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am about to weep; but, thinking that</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We are a queen, or long have dream’d so, certain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The daughter of a king, my drops of tears</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll turn to sparks of fire.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wolsey</td>
							<td>Be patient yet.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Katherine</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I will, when you are humble; nay, before,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or God will punish me. I do believe,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Induced by potent circumstances, that</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You are mine enemy, and make my challenge</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You shall not be my judge: for it is you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have blown this coal betwixt my lord and me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which God’s dew quench! Therefore I say again,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I utterly abhor, yea, from my soul</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Refuse you for my judge; whom, yet once more,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I hold my most malicious foe, and think not</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At all a friend to truth.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wolsey</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I do profess</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You speak not like yourself; who ever yet</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have stood to charity, and display’d the effects</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of disposition gentle, and of wisdom</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O’ertopping woman’s power. Madam, you do me wrong:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have no spleen against you; nor injustice</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For you or any: how far I have proceeded,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or how far further shall, is warranted</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By a commission from the consistory,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yea, the whole consistory of Rome. You charge me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I have blown this coal: I do deny it:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The king is present: if it be known to him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I gainsay my deed, how may he wound,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And worthily, my falsehood! yea, as much</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As you have done my truth. If he know</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I am free of your report, he knows</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am not of your wrong. Therefore in him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It lies to cure me: and the cure is, to</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Remove these thoughts from you: the which before</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His highness shall speak in, I do beseech</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You, gracious madam, to unthink your speaking</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And to say so no more.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Katherine</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord, my lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am a simple woman, much too weak</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To oppose your cunning. You’re meek and humble-mouth’d;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You sign your place and calling, in full seeming,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With meekness and humility; but your heart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is cramm’d with arrogancy, spleen, and pride.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You have, by fortune and his highness’ favours,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Gone slightly o’er low steps and now are mounted</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where powers are your retainers, and your words,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Domestics to you, serve your will as’t please</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yourself pronounce their office. I must tell you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You tender more your person’s honour than</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your high profession spiritual: that again</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I do refuse you for my judge; and here,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before you all, appeal unto the pope,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To bring my whole cause ’fore his holiness,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And to be judged by him. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She curtsies to the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King</b>, and offers to depart.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Campeius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The queen is obstinate,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stubborn to justice, apt to accuse it, and</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Disdainful to be tried by’t: ’tis not well.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She’s going away.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King</td>
							<td>Call her again.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Crier</td>
							<td>Katharine Queen of England, come into the court.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Griffith</td>
							<td>Madam, you are call’d back.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Katherine</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What need you note it? pray you, keep your way:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When you are call’d, return. Now, the Lord help,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They vex me past my patience! Pray you, pass on:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will not tarry; no, nor ever more</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon this business my appearance make</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In any of their courts. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</b> and her Attendants.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Go thy ways, Kate:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That man i’ the world who shall report he has</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A better wife, let him in nought be trusted,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For speaking false in that: thou art, alone,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If thy rare qualities, sweet gentleness,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy meekness saint-like, wife-like government,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Obeying in commanding, and thy parts</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sovereign and pious else, could speak thee out,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The queen of earthly queens: she’s noble born;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, like her true nobility, she has</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Carried herself towards me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wolsey</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Most gracious sir,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In humblest manner I require your highness,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That it shall please you to declare, in hearing</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of all these ears⁠—for where I am robb’d and bound,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There must I be unloosed, although not there</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At once and fully satisfied⁠—whether ever I</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did broach this business to your highness; or</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Laid any scruple in your way, which might</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Induce you to the question on’t? or ever</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have to you, but with thanks to God for such</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A royal lady, spake one the least word that might</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be to the prejudice of her present state,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or touch of her good person?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord cardinal,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I do excuse you; yea, upon mine honour,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I free you from’t. You are not to be taught</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That you have many enemies, that know not</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why they are so, but, like to village-curs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bark when their fellows do: by some of these</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The queen is put in anger. You’re excused:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But will you be more justified? you ever</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have wish’d the sleeping of this business; never desired</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It to be stirr’d; but oft have hinder’d, oft,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The passages made toward it: on my honour,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I speak my good lord cardinal to this point,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thus far clear him. Now, what moved me to’t,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will be bold with time and your attention:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then mark the inducement. Thus it came; give heed to’t:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My conscience first received a tenderness,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Scruple, and prick, on certain speeches utter’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By the Bishop of Bayonne, then French ambassador;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who had been hither sent on the debating</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A marriage ’twixt the Duke of Orleans and</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our daughter Mary: i’ the progress of this business,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ere a determinate resolution, he,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I mean the bishop, did require a respite;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wherein he might the king his lord advertise</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whether our daughter were legitimate,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Respecting this our marriage with the dowager,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sometimes our brother’s wife. This respite shook</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The bosom of my conscience, enter’d me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yea, with a splitting power, and made to tremble</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The region of my breast; which forced such way,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That many mazed considerings did throng</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And press’d in with this caution. First, methought</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I stood not in the smile of heaven; who had</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Commanded nature, that my lady’s womb,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If it conceived a male child by me, should</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do no more offices of life to’t than</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The grave does to the dead; for her male issue</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or died where they were made, or shortly after</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This world had air’d them: hence I took a thought,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This was a judgment on me; that my kingdom,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Well worthy the best heir o’ the world, should not</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be gladded in’t by me: then follows, that</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I weigh’d the danger which my realms stood in</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By this my issue’s fail; and that gave to me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Many a groaning throe. Thus hulling in</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The wild sea of my conscience, I did steer</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Toward this remedy, whereupon we are</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now present here together; that’s to say,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I meant to rectify my conscience⁠—which</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I then did feel full sick, and yet not well⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By all the reverend fathers of the land</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And doctors learn’d: first I began in private</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With you, my Lord of Lincoln; you remember</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How under my oppression I did reek,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When I first moved you.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lincoln</td>
							<td>Very well, my liege.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I have spoke long: be pleased yourself to say</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How far you satisfied me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lincoln</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>So please your highness,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The question did at first so stagger me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bearing a state of mighty moment in’t</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And consequence of dread, that I committed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The daring’st counsel which I had to doubt;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And did entreat your highness to this course</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which you are running here.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I then moved you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My Lord of Canterbury; and got your leave</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To make this present summons: unsolicited</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I left no reverend person in this court;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But by particular consent proceeded</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Under your hands and seals: therefore, go on;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For no dislike i’ the world against the person</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of the good queen, but the sharp thorny points</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of my alleged reasons, drive this forward:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Prove but our marriage lawful, by my life</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And kingly dignity, we are contented</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To wear our mortal state to come with her,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Katharine our queen, before the primest creature</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That’s paragon’d o’ the world.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Campeius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>So please your highness,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The queen being absent, ’tis a needful fitness</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That we adjourn this court till further day:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Meanwhile must be an earnest motion</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Made to the queen, to call back her appeal</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She intends unto his holiness.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> I may perceive</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These cardinals trifle with me: I abhor</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This dilatory sloth and tricks of Rome.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My learn’d and well-beloved servant, Cranmer,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Prithee, return: with thy approach, I know,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My comfort comes along. Break up the court:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I say, set on. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt in manner as they entered.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
